# Financial Analysis of Irrevocable Gifts to LCMS Foundation

## Abstract

Each year, the Lutheran Church- Missouri Synod Foundation receives a certain number of irrevocable gifts. To predict the amount that the Church will be receiving on an annual basis is helpful in assisting the Church plan financial operations. We have tasked ourselves with finding an accurate and representative model of the annual amount in donations based on factors such as trends amongst people from different zip codes, ages, marital statuses, and other personal factors, as well yearly fiscal data, birth rate, and unemployment.  

There are many factors at play in the giving of gifts. A person may give one year to the Foundation, but not another. There could be an emotional and spiritual aspect of giving habits. These factors are difficult to assign a measure, and there is no standard metric for how a person feels toward giving a specific year. The closest metric we could access in this realm of religious giving would be a “measure” of faith. It is a valid assumption to assume that all LCMS Foundation donors are members of the LCMS. Since faith cannot be explicitly measured, the closest numbers available would be church memberships (church-goers that have completed confirmation courses) or the number of those baptized (includes both confirmed and unconfirmed baptized church attendees). The entity of the LCMS that holds this LCMS-specific data is Rosters & Statistics. However, they are particular in choosing who to divulge their data to, and the data comes at a monetary price. So, we did not get the chance to work with LCMS-specific data for this project, since our request for data was not approved, nor do we have the funds to purchase the data.

Instead, we will focus on external factors that are made available to the public. Other than faith, financial and social factors also play largely into giving. When considering the options of features for a specific year, we concluded that four factors would be useful in predicting donation amounts: unemployment rate, GDP growth rate, S&P 500 data, and birth rate. The first three features constitute the financial side of giving for our predictive models, and the birth rate gives us a possible glimpse of how the general population feels about the social status of society. Our logic follows that if a couple believes their society is in a bad place (for financial or other reasons) then they will choose to not have children, and the inverse holds true. This may or may not be a faulty assumption, but nonetheless gives us another feature to work with. We are effectively predicting the decisions of individuals, and since human behavior is both an art and science, we try to choose features that reflect this. 

We decided to use linear regression, k-nearest neighbors, random forest, and a neural network to predict the total irrevocable gift amount per year. Although we anticipated that some of these models will have a better performance than others from the get-go (for example, a model such as kNN is highly likely to have better performance over a simple linear regression model as kNN can explore a nonlinear space), we still wanted to attempt to implement these algorithms ourselves and explore differences in outcome. 

Linear Regression plots each feature of the data points along an axis, as well as the label and ultimately finds a line of best fit with least sum of squares error between the points and the line of best fit. In order to make predictions, it follows the formula of the line. When inputting features of a novel dataset, each feature is plotted on the line of best fit, and the label that is returned is the value indicated by the line of best fit where all the features lie. 

K-nearest neighbors better accommodates many data points with a large number of features. Additionally, since our data is likely to be noisy given the wide range of different donation types and circumstances, k-nearest neighbors would lead to a more developed model compared to other “simpler” data mining methods such as linear regression. 
Random forests can address the overfitting problem of a model. The predicted value is calculated by averaging/aggregating each single decision tree’s output, making for a robust model.
Finally, a neural network is a powerful model that can detect patterns within the features to be exploited to better predict our outcome. For example, if GDP growth rate was found to have a greater predicting power than unemployment rate, the neural network automatically takes that into consideration when assigning weights to features. It also utilizes a nonlinear activation function that allows for more accurate predictions.


Please see full report for further details.